add timeboost troubleshooting guide (#2113)
OffchainLabs/arbitrum-docs: arbitrum-docs/run-arbitrum-node/troubleshoot-timeboost.mdx

## How response times work

The response for a transaction submission to the express lane is returned immediately once received by the sequencer. For example, if an express lane transaction is sent to the sequencer at `t=0ms` and it took 50ms to arrive at the sequencer (defined as `time_to_arrive`), then the expected response time is at `t=50ms`. Note that an accepted transaction is defined as an express lane transaction submission where the sequencer returns an empty result with an HTTP status of `200` and will always have their `sequenceNumber` consumed. You can read more about how to submit express lane transactions in: [How to submit transactions to the express lane](../run-arbitrum-node/how-to-use-timeboost.mdx#how-to-submit-transactions-to-the-express-lane).

## Errors relating to the sequenceNumber

When it comes to submitting express lane transactions, there are a few scenarios to consider.

### Scenario 1: You get an error response immediately

> In this scenario, an error response is immediately returned after you send an express lane transaction. The transaction's `sequenceNumber` will be consumed and you may need to re-submit your transaction after rectifying any errors. See [How to submit transactions to the express lane](../run-arbitrum-node/how-to-use-timeboost.mdx#how-to-submit-transactions-to-the-express-lane) for a full list of error responses and how to interpret them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this scenario, an error response is immediately returned after you send an express lane transaction. The transaction's `sequenceNumber` will not be consumed if the error is timeboost related and consumed otherwise, hence you may need to re-submit your transaction after rectifying any errors with the appropriate sequence number. See [How to submit transactions to the express lane](../run-arbitrum-node/how-to-use-timeboost.mdx#how-to-submit-transactions-to-the-express-lane) for a full list of error responses and how to interpret them.
```

Author: Thanks @ganeshvanahalli - i'll commit your suggest changes. As for the various error messages, they are listed in the "how to use timeboost" guide so i think so long as we link out to that table, we are good. What do you think?

#### The block-based timeout for express lane transactions
If the express lane controller decides to send a burst of transactions to the express lane with ascending values for the `sequenceNumber`, then the sequencer will attempt to process them in the order defined by the `sequenceNumber` (as explained above). However, if the transactions arrive out-of-order at the sequencer, then the transactions that do not have the expected `sequenceNumber` will be buffered to be processed until the sequencer receives the transaction with the expected `sequenceNumber`. Once the sequencer receives the transaction with the expected `sequenceNumber`, then the sequencer will begin processing the buffered transaction with the next `sequenceNumber`. In other words, a transaction will only be sequenced into a block once transactions with the other, missing sequence numbers arrive to fill in the “gap” between the expected `sequencerNumber` and a given transaction’s `sequenceNumber`. 

> A block-based timeout is applied to all express lane transactions, even those in the buffer, such that any transactions received at the sequencer will be dropped and have their `sequenceNumber` consumed if they are not sequenced into a block within 5 blocks. This timeout can occur if the cummulative gas usage of transactions (express lane or otherwise) fill up 5 blocks worth of transactions _before_ all of the buffered express lane transactions are sequenced. Note that each Arbitrum block has a gas limit of 32 million gas and 1 Arbitrum block is produced every 250ms. No timeout error will be returned in this case and we recommend checking transaction receipts for confirmation on whether your transactions were sequenced into a block or not. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A block-based timeout is applied to all express lane transactions, even those in the buffer, such that any transactions accepted (meaning `sequenceNumber` is consumed) by the sequencer will be dropped if they are not sequenced into a block within 5 blocks. This timeout can occur if the cummulative gas usage of transactions (express lane or otherwise) fill up 5 blocks worth of transactions _before_ all of the buffered express lane transactions are sequenced. Note that each Arbitrum block has a gas limit of 32 million gas and 1 Arbitrum block is produced every 250ms. No timeout error will be returned in this case and we recommend checking transaction receipts for confirmation on whether your transactions were sequenced into a block or not. 
```

---
title: 'Troubleshoot Timeboost'
description: A guide on common errors & best practices when using Timeboost
user_story: As a developer, I want to understand how to troubleshoot common issues when using Timeboost
author: dlee
content_type: how-to
---

This is a short guide on how response times work and how <a data-quicklook-from="express-lane">Express Lane</a> transactions are sequenced, alongside common errors and best practices for using <a data-quicklook-from="timeboost">Timeboost</a>. This guide assumes you have reviewed our guide on [How to use Timeboost](../run-arbitrum-node/how-to-use-timeboost.mdx).

## How response times work

> The response for a <a data-quicklook-from="transaction">Transaction</a> submission is returned only once the block containing the transaction is produced. For example, irrespective of the type of transaction (express lane or normal), if a transaction arrives at the <a data-quicklook-from="sequencer">Sequencer</a> at `t=0ms` and the block is produced at `t=250ms`, then the expected response time is always (`time_to_arrive`) + 250ms, where `time_to_arrive` is the time it took for the transaction to be received by the sequencer.

Reviewer 2: This paragraph seems a bit confusing, since it starts saying that the transaction arrives at `t=0ms` but later say that it takes `time_to_arrive` to arrive.

I have some extra comments in general about the sequencer behavior explained here, that I'll share on Slack.

Reviewer 2: The paragraph is still confusing, at the beginning it says that the transaction arrives at t=0ms (if a transaction arrives at the Sequencer at `t=0ms`) but later says that it takes time_to_arrive to arrive (where `time_to_arrive` is the time...) 😅 

Maybe it would be clearer if we say something like "If transaction is sent at t=0ms, and the block is produced at t=250ms, the expected response time is 250ms - time_to_arrive, where `time_to_arrive` is ..."

wdyt?

As another example, assume that a transaction is submitted at `t=150ms`. If the transaction is an express lane transaction, the response would be returned at `t =(time_to_arrive)+ 100ms`. If, however, the submitted transaction is normal, then the transaction’s inclusion will be delayed by 200ms, resulting in a response time at `t=(time_to_arrive)+100ms+250ms` (250ms because this is the time it takes to create the next block).

## How express lane transactions are ordered into blocks

> The express lane time advantage is currently set to 200ms, while the current block creation time is 250ms. This means that if an express lane transaction and a normal transaction both arrive at the sequencer at the same time, but _before 50ms have passed since the last block was produced_, then both the transactions may appear in the same block, though the express lane transaction would be sequenced ahead of the normal transaction.

Reviewer 2: This paragraph assumes that the block is not filled up before the second transaction is included. If the block reaches its gas limit, the second transaction will wait for the next block, so it won't appear in the same block as the EL transaction.

Reviewer 2: sgtm

> Express lane transactions are processed in the order of their `sequenceNumber`, which is a field in every express lane transaction. The first expected sequence number for a new round is zero and increments for each accepted transaction. You can read more about how to submit express lane transactions in: [How to submit transactions to the express lane](../run-arbitrum-node/how-to-use-timeboost.mdx#how-to-submit-transactions-to-the-express-lane).

Reviewer 2: What does "accepted" means in this context? We have only talked about transactions "received" by the sequencer before, so if there's a subtle difference, we might want to clarify it.

Reviewer 2: Sounds good, thanks!
Btw, you missed the "You" at the end, which begins the next sentence.

Author: Good catch - edited!

## Errors relating to the sequenceNumber

The `sequenceNumber` field when submitting an express lane transaction is important because transactions with `sequenceNumber=n` can only be sequenced after all the transactions from `sequenceNumber=0` to `sequenceNumber=n-1` have been sequenced.

When it comes to submitting express lane transactions, different types of error responses may arise relating to the `sequenceNumber`. Below is a breakdown of the various error messages related to sequence numbers and the recommendation for avoiding them. Error messages are subject to change.

> To illustrate how sequence numbers are used to accept or reject express lane transactions, assume first that the sequence number for a given round is `n` (i.e `0` to `n-1` sequence numbers were accepted in this round) and there is some maximum allowed sequence number limit `m` that the sequencer can keep track of (for DoS protections).

Reviewer 2: Sharing also another comment about this on Slack

If the sequence number for your express lane transaction is:

- Less than `n`, then your transaction will be rejected because it has already accepted a transaction with that sequence number (`error="SEQUENCE_NUMBER_TOO_LOW"`).
- Exactly `n`, then your transaction will be accepted as soon as the sequencer receives it.
- Greater than `n` but less than or equal to `m`, then your transaction will be buffered to be processed. Your transaction will only be accepted once transactions with the other sequence numbers arrive to fill in the “gap” between the sequencer number `n` and your transaction’s sequence number. You may receive a timeout error if the transactions within the gap arrive after the timeout (i.e., between n and your transaction’s sequence number). However, this doesn’t mean your transaction was rejected - it may eventually get processed. So we recommend checking the transaction receipts ([error #1 below](../run-arbitrum-node/troubleshoot-timeboost.mdx#error-1)).

> - Greater than `m`, then your transaction will be rejected ([error #2 below](../run-arbitrum-node/troubleshoot-timeboost.mdx#error-2)).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Greater than `n + m`, then your transaction will be rejected ([error #2 below](../run-arbitrum-node/troubleshoot-timeboost.mdx#error-2)).
```
Assuming `m` is the maximum number of transactions the sequencer can buffer. We might want to use a constant-like name here for clarity, like "MAX_BUFFERED_TRANSACTIONS" or something like that.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, sounds good. I just mentioned it since `m` is a constant (or a parameter that doesn't change often, anyway), and `n` is a variable, but I guess that's alright.

Notice that I also suggested a change in the text  `n + m` instead of `m` there 🙏

> - Greater than `n` but less than or equal to `m`, then your transaction will be buffered to be processed. Your transaction will only be accepted once transactions with the other sequence numbers arrive to fill in the “gap” between the sequencer number `n` and your transaction’s sequence number. You may receive a timeout error if the transactions within the gap arrive after the timeout (i.e., between n and your transaction’s sequence number). However, this doesn’t mean your transaction was rejected - it may eventually get processed. So we recommend checking the transaction receipts ([error #1 below](../run-arbitrum-node/troubleshoot-timeboost.mdx#error-1)).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Greater than `n` but less than or equal to `n + m`, then your transaction will be buffered to be processed. Your transaction will only be accepted once transactions with the other sequence numbers arrive to fill in the “gap” between the sequencer number `n` and your transaction’s sequence number. You may receive a timeout error if the transactions within the gap arrive after the timeout (i.e., between n and your transaction’s sequence number). However, this doesn’t mean your transaction was rejected - it may eventually get processed. So we recommend checking the transaction receipts ([error #1 below](../run-arbitrum-node/troubleshoot-timeboost.mdx#error-1)).
```

Timeboost's implementation of the above-described sequence number reordering buffer is intended to handle out-of-order delivery of transactions in the case of network delays (en route to the sequencer). This implementation is subject to change as we gather feedback from users.

#### Error 1: Timeout error

`"Accepted timeboost tx failed: Sequence number: %d (consumed), Transaction hash: %v, Error: Transaction sequencing hit timeout, result for the submitted transaction is not yet available: %w"`

This means the transaction was received with a sequence number after the expected sequence number, and the transactions with prior sequence numbers were not received in time.

Using an example to illustrate this case, this error could arise where the sequencer has already sequenced an express lane transaction with `sequenceNumber=3`, but the express lane transaction that was submitted used `sequenceNumber=5`. Since `sequenceNumber=4` has not yet been sequenced, the sequencer will respond by saying the result for the submitted transaction (with `sequenceNumber=5`) is “not yet available”.

> Despite this error message, the transaction may still have been processed if transactions with the missing prior sequence numbers are received. Check for the transaction receipt.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Despite this error message, the transaction may still be processed if transactions with the missing prior sequence numbers are received. Check for the transaction receipt.
```

#### Error 2: Sequence number reaching the max allowed limit

`"message sequence number has reached max allowed limit. SequenceNumber: %d, Limit: %d",`

> This means the `sequenceNumber` of the received transaction is ahead of the next expected sequence number by more than the limit. To resolve this, we simply re-submit your transactions in sequential `sequenceNumber` order.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This means the `sequenceNumber` of the received transaction is ahead of the next expected sequence number by more than the limit. To resolve this, simply re-submit your transactions in sequential `sequenceNumber` order.
```

> This means the `sequenceNumber` of the received transaction is ahead of the next expected sequence number by more than the limit. To resolve this, we simply re-submit your transactions in sequential `sequenceNumber` order.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This means the `sequenceNumber` of the received transaction is ahead of the next expected sequence number by more than the limit. To resolve this, simply re-submit your transactions in sequential `sequenceNumber` order.
```

#### Error 3: Already-consumed `sequenceNumber` related errors

`"Accepted timeboost tx failed: Sequence number: %d (consumed), Transaction hash: %v, Error: $some error unrelated to timeout$”`  

> This type of error means that the underlying transaction of the express lane submission has erred for another reason, and the corresponding `sequenceNumber` has been consumed. A description of these other types of errors can be found [in our guide about how to submit transactions to the express lane"](../run-arbitrum-node/how-to-use-timeboost.mdx#how-to-submit-transactions-to-the-express-lane).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This type of error means that the underlying transaction of the express lane submission has errored for another reason, and the corresponding `sequenceNumber` has been consumed. A description of these other types of errors can be found [in our guide about how to submit transactions to the express lane"](../run-arbitrum-node/how-to-use-timeboost.mdx#how-to-submit-transactions-to-the-express-lane).
```

#### Table 2: Errors relating to express lane transaction submission

Note that if you get any of the errors below, then the sequence number used in your express lane transaction was _not_ consumed.
| Error | Description |
| ------------------------------ | --------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `MALFORMED_DATA` | wrong input data, failed to deserialize, missing certain fields, etc. |
| `WRONG_CHAIN_ID` | wrong chain id for the target chain |
| `WRONG_SIGNATURE` | signature failed to verify |
| `BAD_ROUND_NUMBER` | incorrect round, such as one from the past |
| `NOT_EXPRESS_LANE_CONTROLLER` | the sender is not the express lane controller |
| `NO_ONCHAIN_CONTROLLER` | there is no defined, on-chain express lane controller for the round |
| `SEQUENCE_NUMBER_ALREADY_SEEN` | the sequence number used for the given transaction was already consumed, try resubmitting with a new sequence number |
| `SEQUENCE_NUMBER_TOO_LOW` | the sequencer number used for the given transaction is numerically lower than the expeected sequence number, try resubmitting with the expected sequence number

> | Log line with the following message: `sequence number has reached max allowed limit` | the limit on the number of buffered express lane transactions was reached |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `sequence number has reached max allowed limit` | the limit on the number of buffered express lane transactions was reached |
```
this isnt a log line though, its an error message returned to sender
